A recurrent neural network (RNN) is a class of artificial neural network where connections between units form a directed cycle. This creates an internal state of the network which allows it to exhibit dynamic temporal behavior. Unlike feedforward neural networks, RNNs can use their internal memory to process arbitrary sequences of inputs. This makes them applicable to tasks such as unsegmented connected handwriting recognition, where they have achieved the best known results. Fully recurrent network : This is the basic architecture developed in the 1980s which is a network of neuron-like units, each with a directed connection to every other unit. Each unit has a time-varying real-valued activation. Each connection has a modifiable real-valued weight. Some of the nodes are called input nodes, some output nodes, the rest hidden nodes. Most architectures below are special cases. For supervised learning in discrete time settings, training sequences of real-valued input vectors become sequences of activations of the input nodes, one input vector at a time. At any given time step, each non-input unit computes its current activation as a nonlinear function of the weighted sum of the activations of all units from which it receives connections. There may be teacher-given target activations for some of the output units at certain time steps. For example, if the input sequence is a speech signal corresponding to a spoken digit, the final target output at the end of the sequence may be a label classifying the digit. For each sequence, its error is the sum of the deviations of all target signals from the corresponding activations computed by the network. For a training set of numerous sequences, the total error is the sum of the errors of all individual sequences. Algorithms for minimizing this error are mentioned in the section on training algorithms below. In reinforcement learning settings, there is no teacher providing target signals for the RNN, instead a fitness function or reward function is occasionally used to evaluate the RNN's performance, which is influencing its input stream through output units connected to actuators affecting the environment. Again, compare the section on training algorithms below. Hopfield network : The Hopfield network is of historic interest although it is not a general RNN, as it is not designed to process sequences of patterns. Instead it requires stationary inputs. It is a RNN in which all connections are symmetric. Invented by John Hopfield in 1982, it guarantees that its dynamics will converge. If the connections are trained using Hebbian learning then the Hopfield network can perform as robust content-addressable memory, resistant to connection alteration. A variation on the Hopfield network is the bidirectional associative memory (BAM). The BAM has two layers, either of which can be driven as an input, to recall an association and produce an output on the other layer. Elman networks and Jordan networks : The following special case of the basic architecture above was employed by Jeff Elman. A three-layer network is used (arranged vertically as x, y, and z in the illustration), with the addition of a set of "context units". There are connections from the middle (hidden) layer to these context units fixed with a weight of one. At each time step, the input is propagated in a standard feed-forward fashion, and then a learning rule is applied. The fixed back connections result in the context units always maintaining a copy of the previous values of the hidden units (since they propagate over the connections before the learning rule is applied). Thus the network can maintain a sort of state, allowing it to perform such tasks as sequence-prediction that are beyond the power of a standard multilayer perceptron. Jordan networks : due to Michael I. Jordan, are similar to Elman networks. The context units are however fed from the output layer instead of the hidden layer. The context units in a Jordan network are also referred to as the state layer, and have a recurrent connection to themselves with no other nodes on this connection. Elman and Jordan networks are also known as "simple recurrent networks" (SRN). Echo state network : The echo state network (ESN) is a recurrent neural network with a sparsely connected random hidden layer. The weights of output neurons are the only part of the network that can change and be trained. ESN are good at reproducing certain time series. A variant for spiking neurons is known as Liquid state machines. Long short-term memory (LSTM) network : This is a recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture (an artificial neural network) published in 1997 by Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Like most RNNs, an LSTM network is universal in the sense that given enough network units it can compute anything a conventional computer can compute, provided it has the proper weight matrix, which may be viewed as its program. Unlike traditional RNNs, an LSTM network is well-suited to learn from experience to classify, process and predict time series when there are very long time lags of unknown size between important events. This is one of the main reasons why LSTM outperforms alternative RNNs and Hidden Markov Models and other sequence learning methods in numerous applications. For example, LSTM achieved the best known results in unsegmented connected handwriting recognition, and in 2009 won the ICDAR handwriting competition. LSTM networks have also been used for automatic speech recognition, and were a major component of a network that recently achieved a record 17.7% phoneme error rate on the classic TIMIT natural speech dataset. An LSTM network is an artificial neural network that contains LSTM blocks instead of, or in addition to, regular network units. An LSTM block may be described as a "smart" network unit that can remember a value for an arbitrary length of time. An LSTM block contains gates that determine when the input is significant enough to remember, when it should continue to remember or forget the value, and when it should output the value. A typical implementation of an LSTM block is shown to the right. The four units shown at the bottom of the figure are sigmoid units (y=s(\sum w_i x_i), where s is some squashing function, such as the logistic function). The left-most of these units computes a value which is conditionally fed as an input value to the block's memory. The other three units serve as gates to determine when values are allowed to flow into or out of the block's memory. The second unit from the left (on the bottom row) is the "input gate". When it outputs a value close to zero, it zeros out the value from the left-most unit, effectively blocking that value from entering into the next layer. The second unit from the right is the "forget gate". When it outputs a value close to zero, the block will effectively forget whatever value it was remembering. The right-most unit (on the bottom row) is the "output gate". It determines when the unit should output the value in its memory. The units containing the \Pi symbol compute the product of their inputs (y=\Pi x_i). These units have no weights. The unit with the \Sigma symbol computes a linear function of its inputs (y=\sum w_i x_i.) The output of this unit is not squashed so that it can remember the same value for many time-steps without the value decaying. This value is fed back in so that the block can "remember" it (as long as the forget gate allows). Typically, this value is also fed into the 3 gating units to help them make gating decisions. To minimize LSTM's total error on a set of training sequences, iterative gradient descent such as backpropagation through time can be used to change each weight in proportion to its derivative with respect to the error. A major problem with gradient descent for standard RNNs is that error gradients vanish exponentially quickly with the size of the time lag between important events, as first realized in 1991. With LSTM blocks, however, when error values are back-propagated from the output, the error becomes trapped in the memory portion of the block. This is referred to as an "error carousel", which continuously feeds error back to each of the gates until they become trained to cut off the value. Thus, regular backpropagation is effective at training an LSTM block to remember values for very long durations. LSTM can also be trained by a combination of artificial evolution for weights to the hidden units, and pseudo-inverse or support vector machines for weights to the output units. In reinforcement learning applications LSTM can be trained by policy gradient methods or evolution strategies or genetic algorithms. Bi-directional RNN : Invented by Schuster & Paliwal in 1997, bi-directional RNN or BRNN use a finite sequence to predict or label each element of the sequence based on both the past and the future context of the element. This is done by adding the outputs of two RNN, one processing the sequence from left to right, the other one from right to left. The combined outputs are the predictions of the teacher-given target signals. This technique proved to be especially useful when combined with LSTM RNN. Continuous-time RNN : A continuous time recurrent neural network (CTRNN) is a dynamical systems model of biological neural networks. A CTRNN uses a system of ordinary differential equations to model the effects on a neuron of the incoming spike train. CTRNNs are more computationally efficient than directly simulating every spike in a network as they do not model neural activations at this level of detail. For a neuron i in the network with action potential y_{i} the rate of change of activation is given by \tau_{i}\dot{y}_{i}=-y_{i}+\sigma(\sum_{j=1}^{n}w_{ji}y_{j}-\Theta_{j})+I_{i}(t). CTRNNs have frequently been applied in the field of evolutionary robotics, where they have been used to address, for example, vision, co-operation and minimally cognitive behaviour. Hierarchical RNN : There are many instances of hierarchical RNN whose elements are connected in various ways to decompose hierarchical behavior into useful subprograms. Neural Turing Machines : NTMs are a method of extending the capabilities of recurrent neural networks by coupling them to external memory resources, which they can interact with by attentional processes. The combined system is analogous to a Turing Machine or Von Neumann architecture but is differentiable end-to-end, allowing it to be efficiently trained with gradient descent. Bidirectional Associative Memory (BAM) : First introduced by Kosko, BAM neural networks store associative data as a vector. The bi-directionality comes from passing information through a matrix and its transpose. Typically, bipolar encoding is preferred to binary encoding of the associative pairs. Recently, stochastic BAM models using Markov stepping were optimized for increased network stability and relevance to real-world applications. Multiple Timescales Recurrent Neural Network (MTRNN) Model : MTRNN is a possible neural-based computational model that imitates to some extent, the activity of the brain. It has the ability to simulate the functional hierarchy of the brain through self-organization that not only depends on spatial connection between neurons, but also on distinct types of neuron activities, each with distinct time properties. With such varied neuronal activities, continuous sequences of any set of behaviors are segmented into reusable primitives, which in turn are flexibly integrated into diverse sequential behaviors. The biological approval of such a type of hierarchy has been discussed on the memory-prediction theory of brain function by Jeff Hawkins in his book On Intelligence.
